# Event handling

Date: 2018/02/20

## Requirements

* message topics
* reverse proxy support
* security
* Python clients
* JS clients
* multi-channel
* easy to set up
* future scalability

## Considerations

### AMQP 
AMQP is a protocol for message communication. In the OSI stack, it is on the same level as HTTP/HTTPS.

This does add the difficulty that our current gateway (Janus) does not seem to support reverse-proxying AMQP.

### STOMP
STOMP is a further abstraction of messaging. RabbitMQ supports it using a plugin.
It serves as a good abstraction for messaging, but still operates natively in its own protocol.

### STOMP over WS?
Some libraries offer this. Advantages: we can reverse proxy. Disadvantages: what are we even doing at this point?

### Don't reverse proxy?
Consequences:
* We open more ports
* Everyone needs to remember two hosts: the MQ, and the gateway
* Two separate security implementations

## Conclusions

* We do not want outside clients to have a direct connection to the event bus implementation (RabbitMQ)
* For service <-> event bus communication, AMQP is sufficiently generic.
* Outside clients will need to subscribe to services offering data sources. This allows abstraction of the internal event bus implementation.

## Implementation

* RabbitMQ is the chosen implementation.
* Services are responsible for event bus interaction through functionality offered in `brewblox_service.events`.
* `brewblox_service.events` communicates using an async AMQP library. This implementation detail is hidden from clients of the API.
* The event bus is not reverse proxied through the gateway
* Clients outside the gateway will be able to subscribe to data sources offered by services. These services will be responsible for event -> data source translation.
